>> Richard Feldman: At any rate,
we've now arrived at a point where we
have successfully unified everything.
We've ended up with basically
achieving our goal.
We had our goal of two successful calls,
two identity function, no type mismatches,
and yet full type inference occurred,
and we've achieved that goal.
We can now ask what is the return type of
this thing and it'll go and say, okay,
that's in slot 4.
Let's go look at number 7.
It's a number.
Same thing over here,
we can go ask what's in slot 8.
It's 11 and that's a string.
Great, we've successfully inferred
the correct types and all without any type
mismatches or with messing up
the identity function, great success.
Okay, now let's move on and
talk about arrays.
So here we have a function that
we're gonna define named concat.
So this is gonna be your classic
staple two arrays together function.
We're not gonna write out the type
annotations for this, because,
as previously noted,
the type annotation is going to be
the very last section of this part.
But you can just imagine
the implementation, right,
we put two arrays together.
The relevant part for
our purposes is like,
I wanna be able to call concat
passing an array of numbers like this.
And I also wanna be able to call
concat passing an array of strings.
So this has some things in common with the
identity function example in that I want
to be able to call it with two
different flavors of types and
not have a type mismatch here.
But also it has some things that
are different, namely that it's not like
we're just taking some variable like a,
and just like not using it.
There are going to be
some constraints here,
because we are actually
using these as arrays.
So, once again,
we're gonna select, okay, 0,
1, 2, 3, 4, etc, initialize our database,
just kind of just blasting through these
things we've seen a million times now.
This is assembling to 1.
This is gonna be our function here.
And then we have for these, we're gonna
end up with Array <5>, Array <5>,
Array <5>.
Just to pause on this for a second,
the basic idea here is that each of
these three things we have ended
up unifying to basically say,
I don't know what my
arrays element type is.
But I do know that these all have
the same array element type,
which is gonna be whatever ends
up being in slot 5 over here.
So taking a step further from this,
we're gonna again,
just a lighting numbers 2 through 3 for
space reasons.
We've got our function up here.
We've got our array <five>.
We still don't know anything
about 5 at this point.
It's one of those variables
that we've created and
assigned all these array types to.
But it has not been further constrained.
So at this point,
it is still totally polymorphic.
And then we're gonna start
doing the blue ones,
the sort of fake instantiated on the fly,
just for the purposes of call once.
So this call to concat, we're gonna make a
fake instantiation of the concat function.
So you can see over here we've got two,
three, and four.
So in the identity function,
these were all the same numbers.
Here we have three different types,
like the two argument types and
the return type, two, three, and four.
They are actually different types or
potentially can be.
They're different type variables,
if you will.
They're different type Ids,
so when we copy it,
we're also going to give
it three different ones.
We're not gonna like
make them be the same.
And then when we get into these things,
instead of the three array bracket
fives up there that we had,
we have array bracket 10, which is going
to be unified in this case to a number.
So once again, the similarity here to what
we saw with the identity function was
that we ended up with this thing
that's basically saying, yeah,
there's an element of polymorphism here.
Now, in that case, the element of
polymorphism was the argument itself.
In this case,
it's something that actually doesn't
really appear in the implementation.
It's more of a behind the scenes thing.
It's like, I know that this is an array,
and I know that this is an array.
And I know that they return an array, and
I know that all those arrays have
to have the same element type, but
the element type itself,
at least in our implementation.
Okay, maybe it would appear in here if we
actually written out the implementation.
But we don't see that,
we didn't write a five on here,
because it doesn't correspond to
any one of these elements out here.
The five is about, this is the type
parameter of that array of.
Of these two arguments and also that
return value, and it's exactly the same
thing over here, except this is
gonna end up unifying with number,
because that's what we're passing in here.
One cool implication about this is that
the process that we use to arrive at this
is not actually different
than the process we used for
the identity function It like
we already had this problem.
We needed identity function to work,
and so
we came up with this cloning the weird
fresh thing, and going and making a copy,
but it's like the same shape,
but it's like different type IDs.
Then from there, you can just
proceed normally with unification.
This is what I meant earlier in Henley
Miller, you kind of are priced into slash,
get for free generics.
Cuz it's sort of, I don't know, we didn't
actually do anything different here than
what we did on the previous section
with the identity function.
If you want identity function to work,
which of course,
you do, you just already have to deal with
polymorphism on a way that happens to work
already perfectly well for generics,
like parameterized types array.
So if you're in one of these languages,
the price in part is essentialized, well,
if you're not gonna support you there
that means that this isn't gonna work.
You're not even gonna be to have
identity function, of course,
you wanna be able to
have identity function.
But of course, if you've already done
that work to implement that then you're
basically already all the way here other
than maybe having a, [LAUGH] syntax for
having type annotations around it.
Now I don't want to completely hand wave
this away and say, this is 0% different.
There are some differences.
The unified function does get a little
bit more complicated, because,
much like with function, array is also one
of those concrete types where you have
an additional consideration, and
you can't just say, these two arrays,
they're both an array.
So I guess that's the end of it.
You have to descend into it and
compare their element types as well.
There is a little bit more work there.
But fundamentally,
the overall approach is it's all
the heavy lifting is already done.
There's just a little bit
of detail work left over.
But fundamentally, it's really not any
different to support having arrays with
polymorphic type variables in
them than it is to just support
the basic identity
function works at all in.
So that's why you tend to see like ML,
Elm, Haskell,
like they all have
parametric polymorphism.
They've all way before Java and
them did because they were like, well,
yeah, we just need it on
a basic level anyway.
[LAUGH] So anyway, so to sum up like
everything we talked about when it comes
to polymorphic type checking before
we move on to type annotations.
Basically whenever you're calling
a polymorphic function, that is to say
a function that behaves differently, which
might be a behind the scenes runtime thing
based on its type, what we do is we just
make fresh copies of the function's type,
like the entire structure of the function.
The new copies, importantly,
have new unbound variables.
So there are different numbers, and
then also those numbers are initialized
to null, and then they'll, of course,
immediately get overwritten
based on the actual call.
Because what we do is we unify
the function call stuff with the copies
instead of the originals, thereby making
it so that the originals are unaffected,
only the copies are affected.
Something I'm not really
getting into here is that you.
Can mix and match a little bit.
So it is possible to have array.concat
both arguments are polymorphic.
You can also imagine array.concat
that has a third argument that's just
like a concrete type.
And then in that case,
when you're doing the copies,
you actually would intentionally
copy the original type,
because you do want a type mismatch if
somebody gives the wrong type for that.
So it's not like the polymorphism is
just like an all or nothing thing,
it's really just like the arguments
that are polymorphic work this way.
And if you have both polymorphic and
non-polymorphic arguments,
it is actually important that you
maintain some of those sim linky kind of
relationships with the copies so
that they are actually unifying against
the originals and
breaking when they're supposed to break.
>> Speaker 2: I had
a quick question just for
my understanding with
the identity function, right?
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah
>> Speaker 2: We have just like that,
the argument type is
the same as return type.
But say we had another polymorphic
function where the return type
is different.
The only difference
there is that we would,
instead of having the same database ID,
we'd have another ID for the return type.
>> Richard Feldman: Yep.
>> Speaker 2: That would also be null.
Is that correct?
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah, so
let's say it would be kind of silly.
But what if you were just return zero,
Yeah.
It's like, what's that argument doing?
But, yeah, so like, if you did that,
then, right, exactly.
So what would happen is that
way back at this stage,
these would not both be two, Yeah.
And so then later,
when we're doing the unification,
the whole reason that we were unifying,
and this is a place where it's maybe
a little bit easier to understand if
you don't do the short cutting and
cutting to the chase,
cutting out the middleman kind of a thing.
If we actually had different
type variables here,
it would be more obvious that
this one was for the argument.
This one was for the return type.
>> Speaker 2: Yeah.
>> Richard Feldman: But yeah.
So this is the point where it's like,
okay, you would get something different
here because the return type
was not identical to the.
>> Speaker 2: Right.
And it could be different, maybe you
return maybe a Boolean or a string,
depending on what value you get for a.
>> Richard Feldman: Well, so that's
a more advanced type system feature.
If you have the possibility of depending
on runtime conditions, like a conditional,
it can either return a bool or a string,
now you need union types in the language.
>> Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
>> Richard Feldman: Or
at least some types or something that
can distinguish a runtime between those.
But in this type system, that would just
be a type mismatch if the two branches
were different things, going back to
our conditionals, ternaries discussion.
But yeah, so when you got to this point,
these would not both be 7 in that world,
where you were returning 0.
One of them would be 7, the other would
be, I don't know, something else.